---
date: 2025-06-06
authors:
  - SaranjeetKaur
categories:
  - Technology
tags:
  - Python
  - Logging
---


# **Logging in Python**

When trying to understand what is happening with a Python code or even when debugging, we often end up adding a bunch of `print()` statements all over the code. While this might provide some idea, it is often not structured and is a bit ad-hoc. Python's `logging` module helps provide a more structured approach to tracking events that happen when the software runs. In this blog, we discuss about `logging` and provide some examples of the same.

<!-- more -->

## Levels of logging

To begin with, we can create a logger using `logger = getLogger(__name__)` and then call the logger methods. These methods denotes the level/severity of the event they are tracking. Depending on which level is configured (default is `WARNING`), the events of only that level or higher will be tracked. Below is a list of standard logging levels:

| **Level** | **Numeric value** | **Use** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| NOTSET | 0 | Placeholder  |
| DEBUG | 10 | Helps diagnose problems with detailed information. |
| INFO | 20 | Confirms that things are working as expected. |
| WARNING | 30 | Indicates either something unexpected occurred or there will be a problem in the near future. The software is still working as expected.|
| ERROR | 40 | A more serious problem and the software has not been able to perform some function. |
| CRITICAL | 50 | A serious error which indicates that the program itself may be unable to continue running. |

The [`setLevel`(level)](https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.html#logging.Logger.setLevel) method is used to set the threshold of a logger to a specified `level`. In the example code below, the logger level is set to INFO which implies, the logger will handle only INFO, WARNING, ERROR, and CRITICAL messages and ignore the DEBUG messages as they are less severe than INFO.

```py
import logging
logger = logging.getLogger('example') # create a logger
logger.setLevel(logging.INFO) # set the logger level to INFO
```

## Handlers

Handlers are used to specify the destination where the log messages generated by loggers should go. For example, the log records maybe send to a log file, or to an email address, or even to the console. It is possible to have multiple handlers for one logger, where each handler sends messages of a specific level to a specific location.
