---
date: 2025-03-24 # CHANGEME
authors:
  - alexdewar
categories:
  - Technology
tags:
  - Rust
---

# Why you should choose Rust for your next research software*

## (* rather than C or C++)

Since its first public release in 2012, the Rust programming language has enjoyed extraordinary
success. It was originally started at the Mozilla foundation and was initially used within Mozilla's
Firefox browser, for which its memory and thread safety is a particular advantage. Nowadays it is
used in a plethora of projects, including Google Chrome and both the Linux and Windows kernels. It
is also popular with developers, being the "most admired" language in Stack Overflow's annual
developer survey for nine years in a row.

Accordingly, there is no shortage of blog posts, videos etc. extolling Rust's virtues and promoting
its use -- so you might well wonder why the world needs another. My feeling was that while the
broader tech world might be well aware of the arguments for using Rust (of course, not everyone
accepts them!), this awareness hasn't penetrated academia. Many *RSEs* are aware of Rust, but most
software development in research is done by researchers rather than RSEs or other technical
professionals. I believe these researcher-developers can especially benefit from some of the
advantages Rust brings, however, so that's why I wish to outline them in this post.

Part of the reason for Rust's success is because of its guarantees around memory safety. This is
particularly important for security: memory safety bugs cause approximately 70% of Microsoft's code
execution vulnerabilities and a similar proportion those affecting Google Chrome, for example (SEE
ALSO <https://www.memorysafety.org/docs/memory-safety/#how-common-are-memory-safety-vulnerabilities>).
However, security is often not important for much research software[^1], so you may be left
wondering what the value is to research.

Why:

- memory safety: generally understood better by RSEs (though some researchers get it). From personal
  experience, it can be hard to convince someone that their code is broken when it compiles and
  gives the expected result
- tooling: RSEs might be prepared to jump through lots of hoops to use a package manager with a C++
  project (I'm not counting a system package manager), but researchers are less likely to be aware
  of why this is a good idea and probably won't bother

Often Rust's memory safety benefits are touted in terms of security -- memory safety bugs are a common
source of serious security bugs (<https://www.memorysafety.org/docs/memory-safety/>) -- and for this
reason [the Five Eyes security alliance have recommended ditching memory unsafe
languages](https://www.theregister.com/2023/12/07/memory_correction_five_eyes/). However, security
is not *often* a concern for the types of research software that are written in C++: it doesn't
really matter if someone can achieve arbitrary code execution through a carefully crafted input file
if the input files are all crafted by you anyway. You might then be forgiven for thinking that Rust
doesn't offer advantages over C/C++ for researchers, but I think this is a mistake. If you fail to
bounds checking in your web server code, for example, you might open yourself up to remote
attackers, but if you fail to do it in your research code, it might mean that your results are
garbage.

-------------
For example, at the time of writing, while Imperial College London's [GitHub
organisation][icl-github-org] contains [44 C++ repositories][c++-repos] and [14 C
repositories][c-repos], there are [none for Rust][rust-repos]. CAVEATS

[^1]: I'm mostly thinking of code for running simulations or analysis where user input is trusted.
      Generally people don't write web apps etc. in C/C++ anyway.
[icl-github-org]: <https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon>
[c++-repos]: <https://github.com/orgs/ImperialCollegeLondon/repositories?q=language%3AC%2B%2B+visibility%3Apublic>
[c-repos]: <https://github.com/orgs/ImperialCollegeLondon/repositories?q=language%3AC+visibility%3Apublic>
[rust-repos]: <https://github.com/orgs/ImperialCollegeLondon/repositories?q=language%3ARust+visibility%3Apublic>
